# Bootstrapping Trust

## Part 1: Encryption Everywhere

Whether you are an encryption expert or a newcomer, welcome! This series
is for you! It assumes you know nothing and takes you from soup to nuts
on how to bootstrap trust with the intent to power a Zero Trust security
model. The process and thinking described in this series are the direct
output of developing the same system for the Ziti open source project.
Ziti can be found on the GitHub project page for
[OpenZiti](https://github.com/openziti). The series starts with the
basics and dovetails into Ziti's Enrollment system.

The parts are as follows.

- [Part 1: Encryption Everywhere](./part-01.encryption-everywhere.md)
- [Part 2: A Primer On Public-Key Cryptography](./part-02.a-primer-on-public-key-cryptography.md)
- [Part 3: Certificates](./part-03.certificates.md)
- [Part 4: Certificate Authorities & Chains Of Trust](./part-04.certificate-authorities-and-chains-of-trust.md)
- [Part 5: Bootstrapping Trust](./part-05.bootstrapping-trust.md)


### Zero Trust

This entire series assumes some familiarity with Zero Trust. If you do
not have a strong background in it, that is fine. This section should
give the reader enough context to make use of the entire series. If a
more in-depth understanding is desired, please consider reading *Zero
Trust Networks: Building Secure Systems in Untrusted Networks* by Evan
Gilman.

Zero Trust is a security model that requires strict identity
authentication and access verification on every connection at all times.
It sets the tone for a system's security to say, "this system shall
never assume the identity or access of any connection." Before the Zero
Trust security models, IT infrastructures were set up as a series of
security perimeters. Think of as a castle with walls and moats. The
castle would have a set number of entry points with guards. Once past
the guards and inside the castle, any visitors were trusted and had
access to the castle. In the real world, passing the guards is analogous
to authenticating with a machine or, at worst, connect the office
network via WiFi or ethernet cable.

Zero Trust does away with the concept of having a central castle that
assumes anyone inside is trusted. It assumes that the castle has already
been breached. That is to say, we expect attackers to already be inside
the network and for it to be a hostile environment. Any resources inside
the network should be treated as being publicly available on the
internet and must be defended. To accomplish this defense, a series of
Zero Trust pillars are defined:

- Never Trust, Verify - the virtue of a connection should not grant
  access
- Authenticate Before Connect - authentication should happen before
  resources are connected to
- Least Privileged Access - access should only grant connectivity to the
  minimum number of resources

Implementing those pillars is not a simple tweak to existing
infrastructure. The first point alone will have much of this series
dedicated to it.

### Ziti & Zero Trust

In a Zero Trust model, there needs to exist mechanisms to verify
identities such that trust can be granted. Zero Trust does not mean
there is no trust. Zero Trust means that trust is given only after
verification. Even then, that trust is limited to accessing the minimum
network resources necessary. To accomplish this, we need a network that
can force all connections through the following process.

1. Authenticate
2. Request Access To A Resource
3. Connect To The Requested Resource

This process is not the typical connection order on a network. Most
connections on a network are done in the reverse order. At first, this
may seem counter-intuitive. To help make Zero Trust and bootstrapping
trust a bit clearer, it helps to have a concrete system to use an
example. It just so happens that the Ziti software system makes a great
example!

<img src="./images/ziti-system.png" style="width: 80%; margin: 0 auto; display: block;">

In Ziti, all of the above steps require interacting with a Ziti
Controller. The Ziti Controller manages the Ziti overlay network by
maintaining a list of known network services, SDK clients, routers,
enrollments, policies, and much more! All of these pieces working
together to create a Ziti Network. A Ziti Network is an overlay network
\- meaning it creates a virtual network on top of a concrete network.
The concrete network may be the internet, a university network, or your
own home network. Whatever it is, it is referred to as the underlay
network.

In the Ziti Network, all network resources are modeled as services in
the Ziti Controller. All services on a Ziti Network should only be
accessible via the Ziti Network for maximum effect. Network services can
be made available via a Ziti Network in a variety of manners. The
preferred method is embedding the Ziti SDK inside of applications and
servers as it provides the highest degree of Zero Trust security.
However, it is also possible to configure various overlay-to-underlay
connections to existing network services via "router termination" or a
particular type of application with the Ziti SDK embedded in it that
specifically deals with underlay-to-overlay translations (i.e. Ziti
Desktop Edge/Mobile Edge).

The Ziti Controller also knows about one or more Ziti Routers that form
a mesh network that can create dynamic circuits amongst themselves.
Routers use circuits to move data across the Ziti Network. Routers can
be configured to allow data to enter and exit the mesh. The most common
entry/exit points are Ziti SDKs acting as clients or servers.

Network clients wishing to attach to the network use the Ziti SDK to
first authenticate with the Ziti Controller. During authentication, the
Ziti SDK client and Ziti Controller will verify each other. Upon
successful authentication, the Ziti Controller can provide a list of
available services to dial (connect) or to bind (host) for the
authenticated SDK Client. The client can then request to dial or bind a
service. If fulfilled, a session is associated with the client and
service. This new session is propagated to the necessary Ziti Routers,
and the required circuits are created. The client is returned a list of
Ziti Routers which can be connected to in order to complete the last
mile of communication between the Ziti overlay network and the SDK
client.

This set of steps covers the pillars of the Zero Trust model! The Ziti
Controller and SDK Clients verify each other. The client cannot connect
to network resources or services until it authenticates. After
authentication, a client is given the least privilege access allowed by
only being told about and only being able to dial/bind the authenticated
identity's assigned services. It is a Zero Trust overlay network!

How did this system come into existence? How do the Ziti SDK client and
Ziti Controller verify each other? How do the routers and controller
know to validate each other? How is this managed at scale with hundreds
of Ziti Routers and thousands of Ziti SDK clients? It seems that this is
a recursive problem. To terminate the recursion, we have to start our
system with a well-defined and carefully controlled seed of trust.

# Trust

In software systems that require network connectivity, there are at
least two parties in the system. Generally, there are more, and in the
case of a Ziti network, there could be thousands. Between two parties,
each time a connection is made, a trust decision is made. Should this
connection be allowed? Mechanisms must be put into place to verify the
identity of the connecting party if that question is to be answered.

One mechanism that might jump out at the reader is a password or secret.
In Ziti, it would be possible to configure the Controller, Routers, and
SDK Clients with a secret. Software is easy to deploy with a secret.
Throw it into a configuration file, point the software at, and off you
go!

It is also fundamentally weak as there is only one secret in the system
necessary to compromise the entire system. In Ziti, this would mean
giving the secret to network clients that may or may not be owned by the
network operator. Also, shared secrets do not individually identify each
component, nor do they define how secrets will power other security
concerns, like encryption.

The solution can be improved. Secrets could be generated per software
component. The controller, each router, and each SDK client could have a
unique secret. This secret would then individually identity each
component! It is a significant improvement, but how does each component
verify connections? Do they challenge for the incoming connections
secret and compare it to a list? That means that a pair of systems that
need to connect must have each other's secrets. Secret sharing will not
do! We can not be copying secrets between every machine. One machine
that is compromised would mean that many secrets are revealed!

This solution can be evolved and improved, but we do not have to do that
hard work! If we did, we would end up recreating an existing technology.
That technology is (public-key
cryptography)[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public-key_cryptography],
and it provides everything we need.

Public-key cryptography allows each device to have a unique, secret,
private key that proves its unique identity. That private key is
mathematically tied to a public key. The public key can be used to
encrypt messages that only the private key holder can decrypt. Also, the
public key cannot be used to derive the original private key. This
functionality fits perfectly with what our distributed system needs!
Alas, public-key cryptography introduces complex behaviors, setup, and
management. In the next article, we will dive a little deeper into this
topic. For now, let us take it on faith that it will serve our needs
well.

#### Setting It Up

So we have decided that public-key cryptography is the answer. What does
that mean? What do I have to do? Let us explore what would need to be
done by a human or a piece of software automating this process. Don't
worry if you don't get all of this; the gist is all you need for now.
Later articles will expand upon this terminology. In fact, after reading
the later articles, consider revisiting this part.

Consider the following diagram of a "mesh" distributed system. This mesh
could be any type of system such as a mesh of Ziti Routers, or maybe it
is a system of sensors on an airplane. What they do does not matter.
What matters is that this system has multiple pieces of software
connecting amongst themselves. Consider what it means to accomplish this
using public-key cryptography.

<img src="./images/mesh.png" style="display: block; width: 50%; margin: 0px auto;">

In the diagram above, each system needs:

- a key pair for client and server connections
- to have the public keys of each system it is connecting to

So what do we need to do? Drop into a CLI and start generating keys on
each machine. Do that by using these commands:

```
openssl ecparam -name secp256k1-genkey -param_enc explicit -out private-key.pem
```

```
openssl req -new -x509 -key private-key.pem -out server.pem -days 360
```

Voila - you now have a self-signed certificate! What is a self-signed
certificate? For now, let us understand it means that no other system
has expressed trust in your public certificate. In
[Part 4: Certificate Authorities & Chains Of Trust](./part-04.certificate-authorities-and-chains-of-trust.md)
we will cover them in more detail.

You can repeat the above process for every piece of software in your
mesh network. Preferably, you log into each machine and generate the
private key there. Moving private keys on and off devices is a security
risk and frowned upon. For maximum security, hardware, such as
[Hardware Security Modules (HSMs)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hardware_security_module)
and [Trusted Platform Modules
(TPMs)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trusted_Platform_Module), can be
used to store the private keys in a manner that does not make them
directly accessible.

Then you will need to copy each public certificate to every other
machine and configure your software so that it trusts that certificate.
The system will need to repeat this process any time the system adds a
piece of software. If a machine is compromised, the analogous public
certificate will need to be untrusted on every node in the mesh. Adding
or removing trust in a public certificate involves configuring software
or operating systems. There are many ways it can be implemented,
including configuration files, files stored in specific directories, and
even via configuration tools such as Windows Certificate Manager
snap-in.

This is a log of careful work to get a simple system running. Consider
what this means when adding or removing many nodes? Visiting each
machine and reconfiguring them each time is quite a bit of overhead.
There is a solution to these woes. While it is elegant on its own, it
does add complexity. Let us see how Certificate Authorities (CAs) can
help! In the next section, we will hit the highlights of CAs. For more
detail, look forward to
[Part 4: Certificate Authorities & Chains Of Trust](./part-04.certificate-authorities-and-chains-of-trust.md).


#### CAs & Adding Complexity

A CA enables trust deferral from multiple individual certificates to a
single certificate which means that instead of trusting each
certificate, each piece of software will trust the CA. The CA will be
used to sign every public certificate our software pieces need to use.
How does "signing" work? We will cover that in
[part three](./part-03.certificates.md) and why it matters part in
[four](./part-04.certificate-authorities-and-chains-of-trust.md). For
now, the basics will be provided.

Here are the high-level steps of using a CA:

1. create a CA configuration via OpenSSL CNF files
2. create the CA
3. use the CA's public key to sign all of the public certificates
4. distribute the CA's certificate to every machine
5. configure the machines certificate store or configure the software

For items one and two, the process can be a bit mystical. There is a
multitude of options involved in managing a CA. To perform number three,
you will need to go through the processing of creating certificate
signing requests (CSRs, see [parts three](./part-03.certificates.md) for
more detail) on behalf of the piece of software, and someone or
something will have to play the role of the CA and resolve the CSRs. The
last two steps will depend on the operating system and software being
used.

All of these actions can be done via a CLI or programmatically. You will
have to spend time and energy, making sure the options are correctly set
and learning about all the different capabilities and extensions.
Mistakes will inevitably occur. It is time-consuming to debug why a
specific public certificate is not working as intended. The tools and
systems that use the certificates are purposely vague in error messages
as not to reveal too much information to attackers.

The payoff for using CAs is having the ability to create chains of
trust. Chains of trust allow distributed systems to scale without having
to reconfigure each node every time the system grows or shrinks. With a
little more upfront cost and bookkeeping to run a CA, the system will
greatly decrease the amount of configuration required on each device.

#### Further Concerns

Once configured, there are still other concerns that need to be taken
into account. Consider the following list of events that may happen to a
CA, and it's certificates:

- What happens when a certificate expires?
- How does a system know not to trust a certificate anymore?
- What happens when private keys need to regenerate?

CAs do not automatically handle the propagation of these types of
events. CAs are files on a storage device or HSM. Issuing or revoking
certificates does not generate any kind of event without additional
software. There is also the issue of certificates expiring. That "-days
360", used in the example above, puts a lifetime on each certificate.
The lifetime can be extended far into the future, but this is a bad
practice. Limiting the life span of a certificate reduces attack windows
and can be used as a trigger to adopt strong encryption.

Even if we ignore all of those concerns, who did we trust to get this
system setup? What was the seed of trust used to bootstrap trust? So
far, you could have imagined that a human was doing all of this work. In
that case, a human operator is trusted to properly configure all of the
systems - trusting them with access to all of the private keys. The seed
of trust is in that human. If this is a software system performing these
actions, that means that the system has to be trusted and most likely
have access to every other system coming online. That is workable, but
what happens when your system can have external systems request to be
added to the network? How can that be handled? How do you trust that
system in the first place? Using a secret password creates a single,
exploitable, weak point. Public-key cryptography could be put in place,
but then we are in a chicken-and-egg scenario. We are putting public-key
cryptography in place to automate public-key cryptography.

There are many caveats to bootstrapping trust. In a dynamic distributed
system where pieces of software can come and go at the whim of network
operators, the issues become a mountain of concerns. Thankfully in Ziti,
a mechanism is provided that abstracts all of these issues. To
understand how Ziti accomplishes this, we have a few more topics to
discuss. In
[part two](./part-02.a-primer-on-public-key-cryptography.md), we will
chip away at those topics by covering public-key cryptography in more
detail to understand its powers and applications.

---

Written By: Andrew Martinez  
June 2020
